---
layout: pr
date: 2023-10-04
title: "Type-safe transaction identifiers"
pr: 28107
authors: [dergoegge]
components: ["utils/log/libs"]
host: stickies-v
status: upcoming
commit: e74152d5b48bdca8dfc2217f35842dbb24b2746c
---

## Notes

- Since the activation of SegWit, transactions are identifiable by two types of identifiers: `txid` and `wtxid`. Both identifiers are a `uint256` resulting from a double `sha256` hash of serialized transaction data. The core [difference](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/dcfbf3c2107c3cb9d343ebfa0eee78278dea8d66/src/primitives/transaction.h#L276-L280) is that `wtxid` includes the witness data, while `txid` does not.
 
- Type-safety is a concept in programming to help avoid type errors, enforcing strict correspondence between a variable and its type. It ensures that a program performs only legal operations on data, with validation occurring during compile-time. This proactive error detection and prevention lead to more reliable and maintainable software, minimizing unintended behavior and vulnerabilities. An example of an earlier type-safety improvement in Bitcoin Core is the incorporation of `std::chrono`, introduced in [#16908](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16908).

- In the context, of transaction identifiers, type-safety is important because it is impossible to deduce the type difference from just the `uint256` value. With `GenTxid` type checking can be done, but it is more verbose and done at run-time instead of at compile-time. Additionally, transaction identifier types improve readability of code by being explicit about expected types instead of solely relying on clear variable naming.

- This PR aims to improve type safety by introducing the new [`transaction_identifier`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/28f9ff3d5416407d3c6d5374f6fc3c2767f4a7f3#diff-f3d91988bf7d98529d638fa829dc3fab695be002305a7614eaaeb283d4fb8101R18) type, with `Txid` and `Wtxid` typedefs for brevity.

- There are instances where a variable could be either a `wtxid` or a `txid`. To navigate this, in some places like [`most_recent_block_txs`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6619d6a8dca5a4d8e664a76526ac6bef3eb17831/src/net_processing.cpp#L1916-L1918), the `uint256` type is used. In other contexts such as [`CTxMemPool::info`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/dcfbf3c2107c3cb9d343ebfa0eee78278dea8d66/src/txmempool.cpp#L862), the [`GenTxid`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/dcfbf3c2107c3cb9d343ebfa0eee78278dea8d66/src/primitives/transaction.h#L425) type is adopted.

## Questions

### Concept

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

1. What does it mean for a transaction identifier to be type-safe? Why is that important or helpful? Are there any downsides?

2. Conceptually, when writing new code that requires referring to transactions, when should you use `txid` and when should you use `wtxid`?

3. In which concrete way(s) could using `transaction_identifier` instead of `uint256` help find existing bugs? On the other hand, could this change introduce new bugs?

4. SegWit activated at block height 481,824. Do transactions in blocks < 481,824 also have a `wtxid`? For example, what about transaction with `txid` `dc01120a639283c11eeada6ce540178adfbbca7fe0d2f41076367cbc9e901822`?

5. Are there any places where we currently return a (w)txid as a `uint256` where it would not make sense to return a `transaction_identifier` instead?

6. We already have a [`GenTxid`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/dcfbf3c2107c3cb9d343ebfa0eee78278dea8d66/src/primitives/transaction.h#L425) class. How does it already enforce type correctness, and how is it different from the approach in this PR?

7. Are there any places where `GenTxid` is used but using `transaction_identifier` would be better?

### Code Review

1. How is `transaction_identifier` able to subclass `uint256`, given that, in C++, integers are types and not classes?

2. Why does `transaction_identifier` subclass `uint256` instead of being a completely new type?

3. We define `Txid` and `Wtxid` as typedefs for `transaction_identifier<has_witness>`. Do you see any reason for code to directly use the `transaction_identifier` type? Should we forbid that, and if so, how?

4. [`transaction_identifier::Compare`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/28f9ff3d5416407d3c6d5374f6fc3c2767f4a7f3#diff-f3d91988bf7d98529d638fa829dc3fab695be002305a7614eaaeb283d4fb8101R39) is defined to return a `int`, yet we use `reinterpret_cast<const uint256&>` in the return statement. Is this correct, and if so, why? Why do we use `reinterpret_cast` instead of another cast, such as `static_cast`?

5. Is the [`has_witness`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/28f9ff3d5416407d3c6d5374f6fc3c2767f4a7f3#diff-f3d91988bf7d98529d638fa829dc3fab695be002305a7614eaaeb283d4fb8101R17) template parameter used for purposes other than type differentiation in `transaction_identifier`? What are the limitations of this approach? Do you see alternatives?

6. Consider [`return m_wtxid_to_orphan_it.count(Wtxid::FromUint256(gtxid.GetHash()));`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28107/files#diff-7cfa3d46c37a17d80c78a37d1239b572a03095d50879ba610d87b702cd844f9dR172). Why is it not type-safe to allow `Wtxid` to be constructed by just passing a `uint256` to its constructor? Specifically, why doesn't `Wtxid{gtxid.GetHash()}` compile?


<!-- TODO: After a meeting, uncomment and add meeting log between the irc tags.
## Meeting Log

### Meeting 1

{% irc %}
-->
<!-- TODO: For additional meetings, add the logs to the same irc block. This ensures line numbers keep increasing, avoiding hyperlink conflicts for identical line numbers across meetings.
### Meeting 2

-->
{% endirc %}
